---
title: Texas in Play More than You Might Think
author: Nathan Berryhill
---

Friends, it's Friday, October 18. We are now two weeks into the final quarter of 2019. We all know what that means! Our 2020 Election is ever so closer. Here's a countdown until the 2020 Texas Primary: <span id="election2020"></span>

More and more people are announcing their plans for 2020, whether it be for election, re-election, or retirement. Over the past few months, in fact, more than one-fifth of the Congressional Delegation from the Lone Star State announced their retirement for various reasons. Fact of the matter is, Texans are set to lose clout in the next Congress. Many of these Representatives held powerful chairmanships/ranks in committees because of their seniority. However, that's a topic for another day.

What I want to address in this post is the electoral impact that Texas has, the Speaker of the Texas House drama, and its potential effect for 2020.

First, Texas is in play more than we might care to think. Why? Let's take a look at the Electoral College from 2016 (not counting any faithless electors). Trump's 306 to Clinton's 232. These numbers might appear to be a "landslide" at first glance. However, for the sake of the argument, let's let Trump and the Republicans keep what they flipped in 2016 - Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Florida, Iowa, Ohio, and that one district in Maine. In other words, keep the same map. But with one exception: Texas.

If we keep the same map in 2020 as 2016 with the exception of Texas, the Democrat candidate sweeps 270, just enough Electoral Votes to win the White House. That's the type of clout I'm talking about - it's almost crazy. Let a party keep their electoral gains of 100 Electoral Votes but lose just one state with 38 votes - they still lose! 

Now, do I think Texas will "go Blue"? Not a chance. I've said it before, and I'll say it again: Texas will vote Blue the day California votes Red (speaking in terms of modern electoral history). **BUT the GOP shouldn't take Texas for granted.** The GOP will have to fight and spend money in places where it _isn't_ used to spending money. This is where the Texas House race and the "Bonnen Drama" comes in, too. 

During the 2018 election, Democrats made headway into suburban areas which were once considered Republican strongholds and hence increased their minority in the Texas House. Now, Democrats are trying to flip the Texas House in 2020, which would give them more say in drawing new maps post-2020 - all of them, in fact. State House, State Senate, US House, State Board of Education, and yes, even judicial maps. 

In addition, the Texas House Speaker Dennis Bonnen has engaged in political, potentially criminal behavior involving a quid pro quo offer of media credentials in exchange for political targeting of Texas House members. Just what Democrats need to make a final push. The Texas Rangers began investigating in August. A secret audio recording of the conversation has since become public.

Overall, I still think Texas will "vote Red", but the GOP will have to spend more money and time in Texas than they ever have. This will undoubtedly take time and money away from other battleground states, too. The GOP should probably do one of two things: don't elect sleazy politicians that can damage the party image/principle and instead elect honest people with more than one bone in their spine, or go where no Republican has gone before: urban areas, colleges and universities. You'd be surprised how far dialogue and action can go.

<script>
var countDownDate = new Date("Mar 3, 2020 07:00:00").getTime();

var x = setInterval(function() {
  var now = new Date().getTime();
  var distance = countDownDate - now;
    
  // Time calculations for days, hours, minutes and seconds
  var days = Math.floor(distance / (1000 * 60 * 60 * 24));
  var hours = Math.floor((distance % (1000 * 60 * 60 * 24)) / (1000 * 60 * 60));
  var minutes = Math.floor((distance % (1000 * 60 * 60)) / (1000 * 60));
  var seconds = Math.floor((distance % (1000 * 60)) / 1000);

  document.getElementById("election2020").innerHTML = days + " days, " + hours + " hrs, "
  + minutes + " mins, and " + seconds + " sec ";
     
  if (distance < 0) {
    clearInterval(x);
    document.getElementById("election2020").innerHTML = "";
  }
}, 1000);
</script>