---
title: Why Privacy Matters
author: Nathan Berryhill
---
I was talking to my friend the other day while we were at a coffee shop. She was reading an article for a class when she paused and said something to the extent of, "Why do people have to be dramatic and make a big deal about online privacy? This author makes it seem like people put their deepest, darkest secrets online, and that's not true. Besides, companies like Google collect our data all the time. If its in the interest of national security, I think it would be okay for the government to collect my data."

I asked several questions, not to be argumentative, but to make a point. I also wanted to see how far she would be willing to let someone see her own data. So of course, I start with something simple and basic - Google Search.

I asked my friend if she would have a problem if I read her search records, even the most embarrassing one I could find where she may have forgotten to use the Incognito mode. She smiled and said, "Nope!", to which I replied "Alright, let's see it", while holding my hand out for her computer. She didn't have a problem.

So I asked a different question. "Okay, so you're telling me you've never searched something embarrassing using incognito mode that you probably don't want anyone else to see, like say on a billboard for the public to see?" I was also trying to explain the article's position (which I actually agreed with) is that while the internet, our data, and search history may not completely contain our "innermost, deepest, darkest thoughts", it is certainly an extension of it. She replied something to the extent of, "Well, I still think if it's in the interest of national security, I don't mind. The government can collect and store my data to keep people safe."

I disagreed and explained privacy is a principle enshrined in our country's founding documents, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. More specifically, the Fourth Amendment. The Fourth Amendment in essence states that people may **not** be subject to unreasonable search or seizure, and that the government must first obtain a warrant. It is illegal for the government, Federal or not, to *warantlessly* and *indiscriminately* collect or store data (I'm looking at you, NSA). If the government wanted to search someone's property, they are allowed to search - with the caveat that a warrant must first be obtained.

I further explained that she is not a criminal, so the government would have no business collecting her data - which by her logic, would be in the interest of national security if she was. But she isn't a criminal! She was still adamant in her position.

We paused the conversation for a few minutes. This gave me time to think. In our arguments for privacy rights, we should leave the hypotheticals alone. I knew I needed an example that isn't hypothetical, one that could not be responded with "oh, our government would never do that", one that was not fantasy.

So, playing on the fact that she has previously mentioned she had been getting a lot of "Michael Bloomberg for President" advertisements on YouTube. I asked her, "Would it be okay if the government jailed you because it found that your search history and advertisements showed that you were likely to be a Michael Bloomberg supporter and because they wanted to silence government dissent?" She responded, "That's no longer a national security interest, that's a political and economic interest!" (She didn't quite understand that sometimes in the history of our country, "national security" has often been tied to politics and economics.)

Then I remembered my friend is actually of Japanese descent, so I said, "Sure, but let's go back to World War II era for a second. Would you be okay if the government collected your data, and found that your search history statistically matched those of similar Japanese descent and then put you in a Japanese internment camp? Wasn't that technically a national security interest?" - "Well, the government already has Census data. They would already know I am Japanese-American." Well, then, we agree - the government doesn't have business collecting and storing your data since it already has its own.

Look, I want to keep people safe just as much as the next person. I'm pro-life. My heart is grieved when I learn of the death of loved ones, as I have experienced that pain and sorrow when my father died in 2009. I completely understand the feeling.

I also want to respect and safeguard the rights of the people that are guaranteed by our Constitution and Bill of Rights. If the government wants to search my phone or call logs, it can - but it must first get a warrant signed by a Judge. We have a government run by humans, which we all know are fallible. Humans are not angels and are, indeed, capable of evil. Let's not forget that.

I like how Rand Paul says, You can be a minority not only by your skin color, but you can be a minority based on your political beliefs, religion that you practice, who your friends are, or how much money you have in your bank account. Friends, privacy is important because ALL of our rights are important. If we let one go, we let them all go. Benjamin Franklin is quoted with saying, "Those who would give up essential Liberty to purchase a little temporary Safety, deserve neither Liberty nor Safety." His words are as true today as they were then.
